= Common Larceny User Manual

== Background

=== What Is Common Larceny?

Common Larceny is a variant of Larceny, a simple and efficient run-time system
for Scheme. It is built to run on the ECMA Common Language Infrastructure 
(CLI). In Common Larceny, Scheme code is compiled to Common Intermediate
Language, and is then assembled into bytecode for execution by native 
just-in-time (JIT) compilers.

When used in conjunction with Microsoft's .NET Framework, which includes an 
implementation of the CLI, the Common Language Runtime, Common Larceny provides
an interface to the .NET Framework class library, allowing developers to take 
full advantage of dozens of predefined classes designed to facilitate 
application development.

/////////////////////////////////////
This section needs to be filled in

=== Why Was Common Larceny Developed?

???
/////////////////////////////////////

=== Who Developed Common Larceny?

Common Larceny was initially developed between 2002 and 2004 by Ryan Culpepper,
Joe Marshall, Dale Vaillancourt, and others under the direction of Will Clinger
and Matthias Felleisen at Northeastern University. Felix Klock, Jesse Tov, and 
Chris Burns have contributed to the latest development of Common Larceny.

== Using Common Larceny

The easiest way to start using Common Larceny is to download a distribution 
bundle. Each bundle contains a Common Larceny executable file, and the 
libraries required by the executable. If you'd like to build from source, you 
can do that, too.

=== Requirements

Currently, this software is distributed for Windows on Intel x86 machines, 
Microsoft .NET Framework 2.0.

You can make Common Larceny work on other platforms (e.g. Mac OS X
with the Mono Framework 1.1) but we do not yet provide support for
those systems.

==== Common Language Infrastructure

Before using Common Larceny, you must have some version of the Common Language 
Infrastructure on your system. It is recommended that you use the 'Microsoft 
.Net Framework 2.0' implementation of the CLI. You only need the .NET 
redistributable package, but the .NET SDK contains a much richer set of 
utilities and documentation.

Earlier releases of Common Larceny were tested and found to run on the 
'Microsoft Shared Source CLI (Rotor)' and the 'Mono Runtime' but no tests have
been done to determine if the current release runs on these implementations of 
the CLI.

==== Environment Variables

Common Larceny requires you to have the environment variable `LARCENY_ROOT`
defined as the root directory of your larceny distribution, e.g. `C:\Larceny\`.

=== Distribution Bundle

Choose one of these distribution bundles:

 * Larceny SDK (PLT bundle, DrScheme required) This is the recommended bundle.
   Please see below., see below)
 * Larceny SDK (Zip bundle)
 * Larceny SDK (MSI) - Microsoft Windows Install file
 * Larceny SDK (Gzipped TAR file)

The `CommonLarceny` executable is a console program. When it is started, it 
will print a number of diagnostic lines and then enter a `read-eval-print` 
loop.

_Note:_ The distributed bundles also include a `Larceny.exe` executable. This is
'not' the Common Larceny executable. It is used when running the CompileOnLoad
version of Common Larceny (see below).

==== DrScheme

If you choose to download the PLT bundle of Larceny, you will need DrScheme to
unpack it. Also, DrScheme/MzScheme can be used to rebuild Common Larceny from
scratch.

=== CompileOnLoad 

Running the executable alone loads Common Larceny as an interpreted Scheme 
system. It is also possible to load Common Larceny so that it compiles Scheme 
code upon load. This creates slightly longer load times, but can improves 
execution times by quite a bit, so some find the CompileOnLoad version of 
Common Larceny more useful in certain situations.

To use the CompileOnLoad version of Common Larceny, invoke the runtime with: 
`CommonLarceny.exe -- Larceny.fasl`.

Running the command above requires that both `Larceny.fasl` and `Larceny.exe` 
exist in the root of your Larceny distribution.

=== Building from Source

If you would like to build Common Larceny from source, download the source 
distribution. Once you have downloaded the source distribution, the 
instructions below should enable you to build Common Larceny yourself.

==== Setup

To build Larceny from source, you will need a working Scheme system. You can 
build Common Larceny with another version of Larceny, or a different Scheme 
system like PLT's MzScheme. 

You will also need to have a couple of executable programs available in your 
path. You may need to edit `src\Rts\DotNet\makefile` to use appropriate programs
on your system.

 * You will need a working version of `make` or `nmake`. 
 * You will need the Intermediate Language Assembler (ILAsm). Usually, 
   `ilasm.exe` is located under 
   `\Windows\Microsoft.NET\Framework\v?.?.?\ilasm.exe`.
 * You will need some version of a C preprocessor. Visual Studio comes with 
   `cl.exe`, the Microsoft C/C++ Compiler, which has a command-line 
   switch that enables it to preprocess files. Alternatively, you can use 
   `cpp`. See options for `larceny-setup` below.

Once you have ensured the above requirements are met, start your host Scheme
system, and change to the root of the Larceny distribution, if necessary. The 
`current-directory` procedure should do the trick. Then, load the 
configuration file for Common Larceny: `(load "src/Build/dotnet.sch")`

Next, you need to inform the build tool of the specifics of the host
environment. Invoke `larceny-setup` with three or four arguments:

  > (larceny-setup <host-scheme> <os> <endianness> <codegen-options>)

where: 

   - `<host-scheme>` is a string corresponding to your Scheme system; it
     must match one of the subdirectories of Compat, eg `"Petite"`,
    `"MzScheme"`, `"Larceny"`
   - `<os>` is a symbol, one of `'win32`, `'unix`, `'macosx`
   - `<endianness>` is a symbol, one of `'little`, `'big`
   - `<codegen-options>` is an optional combination of:
     * `$$'mono$$` - to build Larceny using the 'Mono' implementation of the 
       CLI,
     * `$$'rotor$$` - to build Larceny using the 'Rotor' implementation of the 
       CLI,
     * `$$'debug$$` - to build a debugged version of the runtime-system, and
     * `$$'use-cl$$` - to use the 'Miscrosoft C/C++ Compiler', cl.exe, to 
       preprocess certain files needed to build the runtime-system. Without 
       this flag, `cpp` will be used.

For example, to build under MzScheme on a Windows machine, using Microsoft's 
C/C++ Compiler, you would use:

  > (larceny-setup "MzScheme" 'win32 'little 'use-cl)

After setting up the environment for building Larceny, evaluate the following:

  > (build-config-files)
  > (load-compiler)

The first procedure builds the config files (`Rts\*.cfg`), and the second loads
the Twobit compiler. You can't load the compiler until after you have run
`larceny-setup` and `build-config-files`.

==== The .NET Heap

The next step involves building the .NET heap (it's not as hard as it sounds!).
After loading the compiler in the previous step, simply evaluate: 

  > (make-dotnet-heap)

This procedure loads the Scheme files needed to build the .NET heap and 
compiles and assembles their contained code to MSIL code in three stages. First
it compiles Scheme code to MacScheme code (`.lap` files), then assembles the
MacScheme code into s-expressions representing MSIL code, (`.lop` files), and 
finally dumps these s-expressions as raw MSIL code (`.code-il` files).

Evaluating `make-dotnet-heap` produces a file in the root of the Larceny 
distribution, `dotnet.heap.exe`. This is the executable file that you will run
to load Common Larceny. In bundled distributions, we rename this to 
`CommonLarceny.exe`.

==== The Runtime System

Lastly, you will need to build the runtime system:

  > (build-runtime-system)

This procedure will create `Scheme.dll` in the `src\Rts\DotNet` directory. The
`Scheme.dll` library contains the classes that make up the Common Larceny
runtime. Copy `Scheme.dll` into the root directory of the Larceny Distribution.

You should now have a working copy of Common Larceny in your `LARCENY_ROOT`
directory. Run `dotnet.heap.exe` to enter the interactive `read-eval-print`
loop. 

==== CompileOnLoad

Optionally, you can build the fast-loading (`.fasl`) file used to invoke the 
CompileOnLoad version of Common Larceny (see above). To do this, after building
the heap and the runtime-system, run:

 > (build-larceny)

This will create new files in the root of your Larceny distribution, namely 
`Larceny.exe` and `Larceny.fasl`. These files are required to run the 
CompileOnLoad version of Common Larceny.

==== Automating the Build

One might also create a script to automate the build process. The following
script could be used to achieve such automation, when building on a Windows
machine using MzScheme.

  ;; boolean boolean boolean boolean -> void
  ;; builds Common Larceny from source
  (define (mz-build build-heap? build-rts? debug? make-fasl?)
    (current-directory (getenv "LARCENY_ROOT"))
    (load "src/Build/dotnet.sch")
    (larceny-setup "MzScheme" 'win32 'little (if debug? 'debug) 'use-cl)
    (build-config-files)
    (load-compiler)
    (if build-heap? 
      (let ((heap (make-dotnet-heap)))
        (system "move /Y dotnet.heap.exe CommonLarceny.exe")))
    (if build-rts? 
      (let ((rts (build-runtime-system)))
        (system "copy /Y src\\Rts\\DotNet\\Scheme.dll .")))
    (if make-fasl? (build-larceny)))

=== Compiling Code to Run within Common Larceny

The compiler can also be used to compile code for loading into the
Common Larceny interpreter. This allows you to run programs at compiled
speeds without building the code into the larceny executable.

Load the compiler using the same steps as above:

    > (load "Util/dotnet.sch")
    > (larceny-setup <host-scheme> <os> <endianness> <codegen-options>)
    > (load-compiler)

The compiler is now loaded, and you can use the following procedures:

    ;; build-application : string (listof string) -> void
    ;; Given an application name and a list of LOP files, creates
    ;; an EXE file and a FASL file (each LOP file must have a
    ;; corresponding MANIFEST file).

    ;; compile-application : string (listof string) -> void
    ;; Given an application name and a list of scheme source files,
    ;; creates an EXE file and a FASL file.

For example: 

    > (compile-application "EvenAndOdd" (list "even.sch" "odd.sch"))
    > (load "EvenAndOdd.fasl")

or
    > (compile313 "even.sch")
    > (compile313 "odd.sch")
    > (assemble313 "even.lap")
    > (assemble313 "odd.lap")
    > (build-application "EvenAndOdd" (list "even.lop" "odd.lop"))

Note that the first string you supply to build-application or
create-application should have no file extension, and you only load the
resulting FASL file, which must be in the current directory*.

Any Scheme system which can run the compiler can be used to compile the
applications, but of course the resulting FASL files must be loaded
by the Common Larceny interpreter.
