Input, Output, and Files
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

_Procedure close-open-files_

++ (close-open-files) => _unspecified_++

Closes all open files.

_Procedure console-input-port_

++ (console-input-port) => _input-port_++

Returns a character input port s.t. no read from the port has
signalled an error or returned the end-of-file object.

_Rationale:_ console-input-port and console-output-port are artifacts
of Unix interactive I/O conventions, where an interactive end-of-file
does not mean "quit" but rather "done here". Under these conventions
the console port should be reset following an end-of-file. Resetting
conflicts with the semantics of ports in Scheme, so console-input-port
and console-output-port return a new port if the current port is
already at end-of-file.

Since it is convenient to handle errors in the same manner as
end-of-file, these procedures also return a new port if an error has
been signalled during an I/O operation on the port.

Console-input-port and console-output-port simply call the port
generators installed in the parameters console-input-port-factory and
console-output-port-factory, which allow user programs to install
their own console port generators.

_Procedure console-output-port_


++ (console-output-port) => _output-port_++

Returns a character output port s.t. no write to the port has
signalled an error.

See console-input-port for a full explanation.

_Parameter console-input-port-factory_     

The value of this parameter is a procedure that returns a character
input port s.t. no read from the port has signalled an error or
returned the end-of-file object.

See console-input-port for a full explanation.

_Parameter console-output-port-factory_     

The value of this parameter is a procedure that returns a character
output port s.t. no write the port has signalled an error.

See console-input-port for a full explanation.

_Parameter current-input-port_     

The value of this parameter is a character input port.

_Parameter current-output-port_     

The value of this parameter is a character output port.

_Procedure delete-file_


++ (delete-file _filename_) => _unspecified_++

Deletes the named file. No error is signalled if the file does not
exist.

_Procedure eof-object_


++ (eof-object) => _end-of-file object_++

_Eof-object_ returns an end-of-file object.

_Procedure file-exists?_

++ (file-exists? _filename_) => _boolean_++

File-exists? returns #t if the named file exists at the time the
procedure is called.

_Procedure file-modification-time_

++ (file-modification-time _filename_) => _vector_ | #f ++

File-modification-time returns the time of last modification of the
file as a vector, or #f if the file does not exist. The vector has six
elements: year, month, day, hour, minute, second, all of which are
exact nonnegative integers. The time returned is relative to the local
timezone.

++     (file-modification-time "larceny") => #(1997 2 6 12 51 13)++

++     (file-modification-time "geekdom") => #f++
    

_Procedure flush-output-port_

++ (flush-output-port) => _unspecified_  ++

++ (flush-output-port _port_) => _unspecified_  ++


Write any buffered data in the port to the underlying output medium.

proc:get-output-string[args="string-output-port",result="string"]

Retrieve the output string from the given string output port.

_Procedure open-input-string_

++ (open-input-string _string_) => _input-port_++

Creates an input port that reads from _string_. The string may be
shared with the caller. A string input port does not need to be
closed, although closing it will prevent further reads from it.

_Procedure open-output-string_

++ (open-output-string) => _output-port_++

Creates an output port where any output is written to a string. The
accumulated string can be retrieved with
<<get-output-string>> at any time.

_Procedure port?_

++ (port? _object_) => _boolean_++

Tests whether its argument is a port.

_Procedure port-name_


++ (port-name _port_) => _string_++

Returns the name associated with the port; for file ports, this is the file name.

_Procedure port-position_


++ (port-position _port_) => _fixnum_++

Returns the number of characters that have been read from or written to the port.

_Procedure rename-file_


++ (rename-file _from to_) => _unspecified_++

Renames the file _from_ and gives it the name _to_. No error is
signalled if _from_ does not exist or _to_ exists.

_Procedure reset-output-string_


++ (reset-output-string _port_) => _unspecified_++

Given a _port_ created with _open-output-string_, deletes from the
port all the characters that have been output so far.

_Procedure with-input-from-port_


++ (with-input-from-port _input-port thunk_) => _object_++

Calls _thunk_ with current input bound to _input-port_ in the dynamic
extent of _thunk_. Returns whatever value was returned from _thunk_.

_Procedure with-output-to-port_


++ (with-output-to-port _output-port thunk_) => _object_++

Calls _thunk_ with current output bound to _output-port_ in the
dynamic extent of _thunk_. Returns whatever value was returned from
_thunk_.
